.. title: Data Release Description
.. slug: description
.. tags: mathjax
.. description:

.. |sigma|    unicode:: U+003C3 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA
.. |sup2|     unicode:: U+000B2 .. SUPERSCRIPT TWO
.. |alpha|      unicode:: U+003B1 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA
.. |chi|      unicode:: U+003C7 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI
.. |delta|    unicode:: U+003B4 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA
.. |deg|    unicode:: U+000B0 .. DEGREE SIGN
.. |times|  unicode:: U+000D7 .. MULTIPLICATION SIGN
.. |plusmn| unicode:: U+000B1 .. PLUS-MINUS SIGN
.. |Prime|    unicode:: U+02033 .. DOUBLE PRIME
.. |geq|    unicode:: U+02265 .. GREATER THAN OR EQUAL TO

The Legacy Surveys are producing an inference model of the 14,000 square degrees
of extragalactic sky visible from the northern hemisphere in three optical bands
(:math:`g,r,z`) and four infrared bands.  The sky coverage is approximately bounded by
-18\ |deg| < |delta| < +84\ |deg| in celestial coordinates and :math:`|b|` > 18\
|deg| in Galactic coordinates. To achieve this goal, the Legacy Surveys are conducting
3 imaging projects on different telescopes, described in more depth at the following links:

========================================== ===================================== ===========================================
*The Beijing-Arizona Sky Survey* (`BASS`_) *The DECam Legacy Survey* (`DECaLS`_) *The Mayall z-band Legacy Survey* (`MzLS`_)
========================================== ===================================== ===========================================

.. _`BASS`: ../../bass
.. _`DECaLS`: ../../decamls
.. _`MzLS`: ../../mzls
.. _`Tractor`: https://github.com/dstndstn/tractor
.. _`NSF's OIR Lab Community Pipeline`: https://www.noao.edu/noao/staff/fvaldes/CPDocPrelim/PL201_3.html
.. _`Ceres solver`: http://ceres-solver.org
.. _`SciPy`: https://www.scipy.org
.. _`mixture-of-gaussian`: https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.6563
.. _`SFD98`: https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9710327
.. _`recommended conversions by the WISE team`: http://wise2.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/release/allsky/expsup/sec4_4h.html#conv2ab
.. _`Gaia Data Release 1`: https://gaia.esac.esa.int/documentation/GDR1/index.html 
.. _`DR3`: ../../dr3
.. _`DR2`: ../../dr2
.. _`DESI`: https://desi.lbl.gov


Contents of DR4
===============

Data Release 4 (DR4) is the fourth public data release of the Legacy Surveys. It consists of the
first release of data from `BASS`_ and `MzLS`_
reduced using the `Tractor`_. Each of the imaging
datasets is first reduced through the `NSF's OIR Lab Community Pipeline`_ before being processed
using the `Tractor`_.

DR4 includes `BASS`_ images taken prior to July 13, 2016 and `MzLS`_ images taken
prior to June 6, 2016. For the latest `DECaLS`_ images, see 
`DR3`_ of the Legacy Surveys.
The `BASS`_ and `MzLS`_ data in DR4 are reduced in a manner that is largely
consistent with `DECaLS`_ reductions in prior Legacy Survey Data Releases. 

In total, the `BASS`_ imaging included in DR4 covers 58,341 bricks in either 
:math:`g`-band or :math:`r`-band. The `MzLS`_ imaging in DR4 covers 57,943
bricks in :math:`z`-band. The table below indicates the area covered 
in DR4 for different numbers of passes and in different filters.
These are precise area estimates derived from the geometry of
CCDs that contribute to the Legacy Surveys footprint.

===================== ========= ========= ========
Band/Number of Passes |geq| 1   |geq| 2   |geq| 3
===================== ========= ========= ========
:math:`g`-band        3222 |d2| 1642 |d2| 424 |d2|
:math:`r`-band        2862 |d2| 1883 |d2| 792 |d2|
:math:`z`-band        3267 |d2| 2009 |d2| 671 |d2|
All bands jointly     2249 |d2| 763 |d2|  65 |d2|
===================== ========= ========= ========

.. |d2| replace:: deg\ :sup:`2`

There are 
approximately 183 million unique sources in DR4.

DR4 includes the Right Ascension (RA) range of 55 to 301 degrees, and
Declination (Dec) range of +29 to +82 degrees.  There are two small
regions near RA,Dec = (56, +33) and RA,Dec = (66, +68), plus the main
contiguous Northern Galactic Cap region, which lies within RA of 87 to
301 degrees.

DR4 includes the stacked images and the Tractor-based catalogs.
The size of the DR4 data distribution is:

======= ============ =======================
Size*   Directory    Description
======= ============ =======================
6.2 GB  `calib/`_    Calibration files
30 TB   `coadd/`_    Co-added images, including |chi|\ |sup2|, depth, image, model, nexp, and Quality Assurance PNG plots
7.1 GB  `external/`_ Matches to other catalogs (SDSS, etc.)
437 MB  `gallery/`_  Images of notable galaxies (NGC, etc.)
11 GB   `logs/`_     Log files generated by Tractor processing
117 GB  `metrics/`_  Metrics
63 GB   `sweep/`_    Repackaged versions of the Tractor catalogs
256 GB  `tractor/`_  Tractor catalogs
======= ============ =======================

\*Note that although the *contents* of a directory should be fixed for each Data Release, the *size* of a directory can change. This is typically due to updated file compression. So, the listed directory sizes should be viewed as (very reasonable) estimates.

.. _`calib/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/calib/
.. _`coadd/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/coadd/
.. _`external/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/external/
.. _`gallery/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/gallery/
.. _`logs/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/logs/
.. _`metrics/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/metrics/
.. _`sweep/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/sweep/
.. _`tractor/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr4/tractor/

For all of the Legacy Surveys, including `BASS`_ and `MzLS`_, co-added images and 
`Tractor`_ catalogs are presented in "bricks" of approximate
size 0.25\ |deg| |times| 0.25\ |deg|.  Each brick is defined in terms of a box in RA,Dec
coordinates.  For the image stacks, we use a simple tangent-plane (WCS TAN)
projection around the brick center. The projections for the :math:`g,r,z` filters are identical.  
There are 662,174 bricks spread over the sky, meaning that each brick has an average
area of 0.0623 deg\ :sup:`2`\ . The brick images have some overlap.
The co-added images should be
used with caution, as noted below in the *Image Stacks* section.

For `DESI`_ members with access to DocDB, a further overview of DR4 is available in `Kaylan Burleigh's presentation`_ from the June, 2017 `DESI`_ collaboration meeting.

.. _`Kaylan Burleigh's presentation`: https://desi.lbl.gov/DocDB/cgi-bin/private/ShowDocument?docid=3026 


Obtaining Images and Raw Data
==============================

Images, for all 3 of the Legacy Surveys can be viewed 
directly using `the Sky viewer`_
and raw data can be obtained through `the Astro Data Lab's portal`_ (or via ftp; see also the information near
the bottom of the `files`_ page).

Sections of BASS and MzLS for DR4 can be obtained as JPEGs or FITS files using
the cutout service, as follows:

JPEG: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer/jpeg-cutout/?ra=190.1086&dec=51.2005&layer=mzls+bass-dr4&pixscale=0.27&bands=grz

FITS: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer/fits-cutout/?ra=190.1086&dec=51.2005&layer=mzls+bass-dr4&pixscale=0.27&bands=grz

where "bands" is a string like ":math:`grz`",":math:`gz`",":math:`g`", etc.  As of the 
writing of this documentation the maximum size for cutouts (in number of pixels) is 512.
Pixscale=0.262 will return (approximately) the native pixels used by the `Tractor`_.
For information on how to recover `DECaLS`_ cutouts, see the `DR3 description`_ page.

.. _`DR3 description`: ../../dr3/description
.. _`files`: ../files
.. _`the Sky viewer`: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer
.. _`the Astro Data Lab's portal`: http://archive.noao.edu/search/query

Source Detection
================

The source detection uses a PSF- and SED-matched-filter detection on
the stacked images, with a 6\ |sigma| detection limit.
The `Tractor`_ fitting step is initialized with these positions, although
these positions can be changed during the fits and
low-S/N sources can be removed.

For source detection, each image is convolved by its PSF model,
then a weighted stack
of these is created in order to optimize the point-source detection
efficiency.  Next, SED-matched combinations of the three bands are
created, for two SEDs: "flat" (a source with AB color zero), and
"red", a source with AB color :math:`g-r = 1`, :math:`r-z = 1`.  Sources above 6\ |sigma|
are detected in each of these two SED-matched filters, as well as in each band independently.

PSF
===

The Tractor makes use of the PSF on each individual exposure. The PSF for 
the individual exposures are first computed independently for each CCD
using PSFEx_, generating spatially-varying pixelized models.
The same pixelized PSF from PSFex is used for `BASS`_ and `MzLS`_ in order to
match the PSF used to extract `DECaLS`_ sources for `DR3`_.

For DECaLS and MzLS we adopt a 63 x 63 pixel image size and a 0.262 pixel scale and use a 
7\ |Prime| diameter aperture for normalization. For BASS we adopt a 31 x 31 pixel image size and
a 0.470 pixel scale and use a 7\ |Prime| diameter aperture for normalization 
The configuration files for SExtractor and PSFex are available `on our github page`_.

.. _`PSFEx`: https://www.astromatic.net/software/psfex
.. _`on our github page`: https://github.com/legacysurvey/legacypipe-dir/tree/master/calib/se-config

Sky Level
=========

The Community Pipeline removes a sky level that includes a sky pattern, an illumination correction,
and a single scaled fringe pattern.  These steps are described on the `NSF's OIR Lab Community Pipeline`_
page.
This makes the sky level in the processed images near zero, and removes most pattern artifacts.
A constant sky level is then added back to the image that is the mean of what was removed.

Additionally, we compute and remove a spatially varying (spline) sky
model, by detecting and masking sources, then computing medians in
sliding 512-pixel boxes.  The stacked images have this sky level
removed.

Tractor Catalogs
================

The Tractor code runs within the geometrical region
of a brick.  This fitting is performed on the individual exposures
that overlap the brick, without making use of the image stacks.
This preserves the full information content of the data set in the fits,
handles masked pixels without the need for uncertain interpolation techniques,
and fits to data points without the complication of pixel covariances.

Morphological Classification
============================

The Tractor fitting can allow any of the source properties or
image calibration parameters (such as the PSF) to float.
Only the source properties were allowed to float in DR4.
These are continuous properties for the object centers, fluxes,
and the shape parameters. There is also the discrete choice of which
model type to use. In DR4, five morphological types are used: point sources,
"simple" galaxies (an exponential profile with a fixed 0.45\ |Prime| effective radius 
and round profile), deVaucouleurs profiles
(elliptical galaxies), exponential profiles (spiral galaxies), and composite
profiles that are deVaucouleurs + exponential (with the same source center).
The total numbers of the different morphological types in DR4 are:

================= ==================
Number of Sources Primary Objects of Type
================= ==================
   183,489,859    *All*
    90,683,489    ``PSF``
    58,829,887    ``SIMP``
    22,653,067    ``EXP``
    10,492,773    ``DEV``
       830,643    ``COMP``
================= ==================

The decision to retain an object in the catalog and to re-classify it using
models more complicated than a point source is made using the penalized
changes to |chi|\ |sup2| in the image after subtracting the models for
other sources.
The "PSF" and "SIMP" models are computed for
every source and the better of these two is used when deciding whether to keep
the source.  A source is retained if its penalized |chi|\ |sup2| is improved by 25;
this corresponds to a |chi|\ |sup2| difference of 27 (because of the penalty
of 2 for the source centroid).  Sources below this threshold are removed.
The source is classified as the better of "point source (PSF)" or "simple galaxy (SIMP)"
unless the penalized |chi|\ |sup2|
is improved by 9 (*i.e.*, approximately a 3\ |sigma| improvement) by treating
it as a deVaucouleurs or exponential profile.
The classification is a composite of deVaucouleurs + exponential if it is both a
better fit to a single profile over the point source, and the composite improves
the penalized |chi|\ |sup2| by another 9.  These choices implicitly mean
that any extended source classifications have to be at least 5.8\ |sigma| detections
and that composite profiles must be at least 6.5\ |sigma| detections.

The fluxes are not constrained to be positive-valued.  This allows
the fitting of very low signal-to-noise sources without introducing
biases at the faint end.  It also allows the stacking of fluxes
at the catalog level.


Tractor Implementation Details
==============================

Tractor fundamentally treats the fitting as a |chi|\ |sup2| minimization
problem.  The current core routine uses the sparse least squares
solver from the `SciPy`_ package, or the open source
`Ceres solver`_, originally developed by Google.

The galaxy profiles (the exponential and deVaucouleurs profiles mentioned above
under *Morphological Classification*) are approximated
with `mixture-of-gaussian`_ (MoG) models
and are convolved by the pixelized PSF models using a new Fourier-space
method (Lang, in prep).
The galaxy profile approximation introduces errors in these
models typically at the level of :math:`10^{-4}` or smaller.
The PSF models are treated as pixel-convolved quantities,
and are evaluated at the integral pixel coordinates without integrating
any functions over the pixels.

The Tractor algorithm could be run with both the source parameters
and the calibration parameters allowed to float, at the cost of
more compute time and the necessity to use much larger blobs because
of the non-locality of the calibrations.  A more practical approach
would be to iterate between fitting source parameters in brick space,
and fitting calibration parameters in exposure space.  Such iterations
will be considered and tested for future data releases.
Another practical issue is that the current PSF models may allow
too much freedom.

Photometry
==========

The flux calibration for `BASS`_ and `MzLS`_ are on the AB natural system of the `90Prime`_ 
and `Mosaic-3`_ cameras, respectively.
An AB system reports the same flux in any band for a source whose spectrum is
constant in units of erg/cm\ |sup2|/Hz. A source with a spectrum of
:math:`f = 10^{-(48.6+22.5)/2.5}` erg/cm\ |sup2|/Hz
would be reported to have an integrated flux of 1 nanomaggie in any filter.
The natural system means that we have not
applied color terms to any of the photometry, but report fluxes as observed in the 
`90Prime`_ and `Mosaic-3`_ filter systems.

Zero point magnitudes for the CP version 2 reductions of the `90Prime`_ and `Mosaic-3`_ images
were computed by comparing 7\ |Prime| diameter aperture photometry to 
`Pan-STARRS-1 (PS1) photometry`_, where the latter was modified with color terms
to place the PS1 photometry on the `90Prime`_ and `Mosaic-3`_ camera systems.  
The same color terms are applied to all CCDs.
Zero points are computed separately for each CCD, but not for each amplifier.
The *average* color terms to convert from PS1 to `90Prime`_ (for `BASS`_) and 
`Mosaic-3`_ (for `MzLS`_)  were computed for stars
in the color range :math:`0.4 < (g-i) < 2.7` as follows:

.. math::
               (g-i) & = & g_{\mathrm{PS}} - i_{\mathrm{PS}} \\
   g_{\mathrm{BASS}} & = & g_{\mathrm{PS}} + 0.06630 (g-i) + 0.00958 (g-i)^2 - 0.00672 (g-i)^3 \\
   r_{\mathrm{BASS}} & = & r_{\mathrm{PS}} - 0.04836 (g-i) + 0.01100 (g-i)^2 - 0.00563 (g-i)^3 \\
   z_{\mathrm{MzLS}} & = & z_{\mathrm{PS}} - 0.12315 (g-i) + 0.04608 (g-i)^2 - 0.01164 (g-i)^3 \\

The brightnesses of objects are all stored as linear fluxes in units of nanomaggies.  The conversion
from linear fluxes to magnitudes is :math:`m = 22.5 - 2.5 \log_{10}(\mathrm{flux})`. These linear fluxes are well-defined even at the faint end, and the errors on the linear fluxes should
be very close to a normal distribution.  The fluxes can be negative for faint objects, and indeed we
expect many such cases for the faintest objects.

.. _`Pan-STARRS-1 (PS1) photometry`: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...822...66F/abstract

The filter curves are available for `BASS g-band`_, `BASS r-band`_, `MzLS z-band`_ and
`MzLS z-band with corrections`_ for the telescope, corrector, camera and atmosphere (at airmass=1.0).
The derivation of the BASS filter responses is described on the `BASS website`_.

DR4 also contains WISE fluxes force-photometered at the position of Legacy Survey sources.
The WISE Level 1 images and the unWISE image stacks are on a Vega system.
We have converted these to an AB system using the `recommended conversions by
the WISE team`_. Namely,
:math:`\mathrm{Flux}_{\mathrm{AB}} = \mathrm{Flux}_{\mathrm{Vega}} * 10^{-(\Delta m/2.5)}`
where :math:`\Delta m` = 2.699, 3.339, 5.174, and 6.620 mag in the W1, W2, W3 and W4 bands.
For example, a WISE W1 image should be multiplied by :math:`10^{-2.699/2.5} = 0.083253` to
give units consistent with the Tractor catalogs. These conversion factors are recorded in the
Tractor catalog headers ("WISEAB1", etc).

.. _`BASS website`: http://batc.bao.ac.cn/BASS/doku.php?id=datarelease:telescope_and_instrument:home#filters
.. _`BASS g-band`: ../../files/bass-g.txt
.. _`BASS r-band`: ../../files/bass-r.txt
.. _`MzLS z-band`: ../../files/kpzd.txt
.. _`MzLS z-band with corrections`: ../../files/kpzdccdcorr3.txt
.. _`Mosaic-3`: http://www-kpno.kpno.noao.edu/mosaic/index.html
.. _`90Prime`: https://soweb.as.arizona.edu/~tscopewiki/doku.php?id=90prime_info
.. _`DR8 catalogs`: ../../dr8/catalogs/#galactic-extinction-coefficients

Galactic Extinction
===================

The most recent values of the Galactic extinction coefficients are available on the `DR8 catalogs`_ page.


Astrometry
==========

As of DR4, astrometry uses the `Gaia Data Release 1`_ system. Positions of sources are tied to predicted Gaia positions at
the epoch of the corresponding Legacy Survey observation. The residuals are typically smaller than |plusmn|\ 0.03\ |Prime|.

Astrometric calibration of MzLS data is conducted using Gaia astrometric positions of stars matched to Pan-STARRS-1 (PS1). 
The same matched objects are used for both astrometric and photometric calibration. There are some areas of sky where Gaia 
has "holes," i.e., where stars brighter than the Gaia magnitude limit are missing from the Gaia catalog. As a result, in 
some regions of the survey there are fewer matches to a given bright magnitude limit in the PS1-Gaia catalog than there 
are in the PS1 catalog that was used for astrometric calibration in, e.g., `DR3`_ of the Legacy Surveys.


Image Stacks
============

The image stacks are provided for convenience, but were not used in the Tractor fits.
These images are oversized by approximately 260 pixels in each dimension.
These are tangent projections centered at each brick center, North up, with dimensions of 3600 |times| 3600
and a scale of 0.262\ |Prime|/pix.  The image stacks are computed using Lanczos-3
interpolation. These stacks should not be used for "precision" work.


Depths
======

As of `DR2`_ of the Legacy Surveys, the median 5\ |sigma| point source (AB) depths for areas with 3 observations 
in DECaLS was :math:`g=24.65`, :math:`r=23.61`, :math:`z=22.84`. DR4 should reach similar depths.
This is based upon the formal errors in the Tractor catalogs for point sources; those 
errors need further confirmation. This can be compared to the predicted proposed 
depths for 2 observations at 1.5\ |Prime| seeing of :math:`g=24.7`, :math:`r=23.9`, :math:`z=23.0`.

For MzLS, the median 5\ |sigma| point source (AB) depth for areas with 3 observations is  
:math:`z=23.04`. 90% of the individual CCDs are deeper than :math:`z=22.81`.

Code Versions
=============

* `LegacyPipe <https://github.com/legacysurvey/legacypipe>`_: mixture of versions, ranging from ``dr3e-834-g419c0ff`` to ``dr3e-887-g068df7a`` (these are git version strings). The version used is documented in the Tractor header card ``LEGPIPEV``. The date range of the versions is 3/15/2017 to 4/19/2017.
* `Astrometry.net <https://github.com/dstndstn/astrometry.net>`_: 0.67, git versions ``0.67-188-gfcdd3c0`` to ``0.67-152-gfa03658`` (dates 3/6/2017 to 4/15/2017).
* `Tractor <https://github.com/dstndstn/tractor>`_: dr4, git versions ``dr4.1-9-gc73f1ab`` to ``dr4.1-9-ga5cfaa3`` (dates 2/22/2017 to 3/31/2017).
* NSF's OIR Lab Community Pipeline: mixture of versions; recorded as ``PLVER``.

.. * SourceExtractor 2.19.5, PSFEx 3.17.1


Glossary
========

BASS
    `Beijing-Arizona Sky Survey <https://www.legacysurvey.org/bass>`_.

Blob
    Continguous region of pixels above a detection threshold and neighboring
    pixels; Tractor is optimized within blobs.

Brick
    A region bounded by lines of constant RA and DEC; reductions
    are performed within bricks of size approximately 0.25\ |deg| |times| 0.25\ |deg|.

CP
    Community Pipeline (reduction pipeline operated by the NSF's OIR Lab;
    https://www.noao.edu/noao/staff/fvaldes/CPDocPrelim/PL201_3.html).

DECaLS
    `Dark Energy Camera Legacy Survey <https://www.legacysurvey.org/decamls>`_.

DR2
    Legacy Survey Data Release 2.

DR3
    Legacy Survey Data Release 3.

DR4
    Legacy Survey Data Release 4.

DECam
    Dark Energy Camera on the Blanco 4-meter telescope.

maggie
    Linear flux units, where an object with an AB magnitude of 0 has a
    flux of 1.0 maggie.  A convenient unit is the nanomaggie: a flux of 1 nanomaggie
    corresponds to an AB magnitude of 22.5.

MoG
    Mixture-of-gaussian model to approximate the galaxy models (https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.6563).

MzLS
    `Mayall z-band Legacy Survey <https://www.legacysurvey.org/mzls>`_.

NSF's OIR Lab
    `The NSF's National Optical-Infrared Astronomy Research Laboratory  <https://www.aura-astronomy.org/centers/nsfs-oir-lab>`_.

nanomaggie
    Linear flux units, where an object with an AB magnitude of 22.5 has a flux
    of :math:`1 \times 10^{-9}` maggie or 1.0 nanomaggie.

PSF
    Point spread function.

PSFEx
    `Emmanuel Bertin's PSF fitting code <https://www.astromatic.net/software/psfex>`_.

SDSS
    `Sloan Digital Sky Survey <https://www.sdss.org>`_.

SDSS DR12
    `Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 12 <https://www.sdss.org/dr12/>`_.

SDSS DR13
    `Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 13 <https://www.sdss.org/dr13/>`_.

SED
    Spectral energy distribution.

SourceExtractor
    `Source Extractor reduction code <https://www.astromatic.net/software/sextractor>`_.

SFD98
    Schlegel, Finkbeiner & Davis 1998 extinction maps (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998ApJ...500..525S/abstract).

Tractor
    `Dustin Lang's inference code <https://github.com/dstndstn/tractor>`_.

unWISE
    New coadds of the WISE imaging, at original full resolution
    (http://unwise.me, https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0308).

WISE
    `Wide Infrared Survey Explorer <http://wise.ssl.berkeley.edu>`_.
