.. title: Data Release Description
.. slug: description
.. tags: 
.. has_math: yes

.. |sigma|    unicode:: U+003C3 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA
.. |sup2|     unicode:: U+000B2 .. SUPERSCRIPT TWO
.. |alpha|      unicode:: U+003B1 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA
.. |chi|      unicode:: U+003C7 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI
.. |delta|    unicode:: U+003B4 .. GREEK SMALL LETTER DELTA
.. |deg|    unicode:: U+000B0 .. DEGREE SIGN
.. |times|  unicode:: U+000D7 .. MULTIPLICATION SIGN
.. |plusmn| unicode:: U+000B1 .. PLUS-MINUS SIGN
.. |Prime|    unicode:: U+02033 .. DOUBLE PRIME


Contents of DR2
===============

The Legacy Survey will produce an inference model of the 14,000 square degrees
of extragalactic sky visible from the northern hemisphere in three optical bands
(g,r,z) and four infrared bands.  The sky coverage is approximately bounded by
-18\ |deg| < |delta| < +84\ |deg| in celestial coordinates and :math:`|b|` > 18\
|deg| in Galactic coordinates.  The Legacy Survey is providing these data
in the equatorial region at |delta| < +30\ |deg| using the Dark Energy Camera on
the Blanco Telescope.

Data Release 2 (DR2) is the second public data release of images and catalogs for
the DECam Legacy Survey. DR2 includes DECam data primarily from z-band
observations in August 2013 (https://legacy.noirlab.edu/perl/abstract?2013A-0741) and
g,r,z-band observations from August 2014 through June 2015 for an NOAO survey
program (https://legacy.noirlab.edu/perl/abstract?2014B-0404).  It also includes
public data from other programs with the footprint, including data taken by the
Dark Energy Survey that are now public, in the "stripe 82" region bounded by 315 <
|alpha| < 360 |deg| or 0 < |alpha| < 5 |deg|, and by -3\ |deg| < |delta| < +3\
|deg|.

In total, the optical data covers a disjoint footprint
with 2078 deg\ |sup2| in g-band, 2141 deg\ |sup2| in r-band and 5322 deg\ |sup2|
in z-band, of which 1807 deg\ |sup2| has been observed in all
three optical filters.

There are approximately 260 million unique sources in DR2 spread over 97,554 bricks.

DR2 includes the stacked images and the Tractor-based catalogs.
The size of the DR2 data distribution is:

======= ============ ====================
Size*   Directory    Description
======= ============ ====================
36 GB   `calib/`_    Calibration files
33 TB   `coadd/`_    Co-added images, including |chi|\ |sup2|, depth, image, model, nexp, and PNG quality-assurance plots
5.1 GB  `external/`_ Matches to other catalogs (SDSS, etc.)
437 MB  `gallery/`_  Images of notable galaxies (NGC, etc.)
16 GB   `logs/`_     Log files generated by Tractor processing
211 GB  `metrics/`_  Metrics
108 GB  `sweep/`_    Repackaged versions of the Tractor catalogs
301 GB  `tractor/`_  Tractor catalogs
======= ============ ====================

\*Note that although the *contents* of a directory should be fixed for each Data Release, the *size* of a directory can change. This is typically due to updated file compression. So, the listed directory sizes should be viewed as (very reasonable) estimates.

.. _`calib/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/calib/
.. _`coadd/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/coadd/
.. _`external/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/external/
.. _`gallery/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/gallery/
.. _`logs/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/logs/
.. _`metrics/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/metrics/
.. _`sweep/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/sweep/
.. _`tractor/`: https://portal.nersc.gov/cfs/cosmo/data/legacysurvey/dr2/tractor/

The co-added images and Tractor catalogs are presented in "bricks" of approximate
size 0.25\ |deg| |times| 0.25\ |deg|.  Each brick is defined in terms of a box in RA,Dec
coordinates.  For the image stacks, we use a simple tangent-plane (WCS TAN)
projection around the brick center, with size 3600 |times| 3600 pixels at a scale of
0.262 arcseconds per pixel.  The projections for the g,r,z filters are identical.  The
brick images have some overlap.


Obtaining Images and Raw Data
==============================

Images can be viewed directly using `the Sky viewer`_
and raw data can be obtained through `the NOIRLab portal`_ (see also the information near
the bottom of the `files`_ page).

Sections of the Legacy Survey can be obtained as JPEGs or FITS files using
the cutout service as follows:

JPEG: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer/jpeg-cutout-decals-dr2/?ra=244.6961&dec=7.4106&size=512&pixscale=0.262&bands=grz

FITS: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer/fits-cutout-decals-dr2?ra=244.6961&dec=7.4106&pixscale=0.911&size=512&bands=r

where "bands" is a string like "grz","gz","g", etc.  As of the writing of this documentation the
maximum size for cutouts (in number of pixels) is 512.
Pixscale=0.262 will return (approximately) the native DECam pixels.

See also the `list of URL/cutout patterns that are supported by the viewer`_.

.. _`list of URL/cutout patterns that are supported by the viewer`: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer/urls
.. _`files`: ../files
.. _`the Sky viewer`: https://www.legacysurvey.org/viewer
.. _`the NOIRLab portal`: https://astroarchive.noirlab.edu/portal/search/

Source Detection
================

The source detection uses a PSF- and SED-matched-filter detection on
the DECam stacked images, with a 6\ |sigma| detection limit.
The Tractor fitting
step is initialized with these positions, although
those positions can be changed during the fits and
low-S/N sources can be removed.

For source detection, each DECam image is convolved by its PSF model,
then a weighted stack
of these is created in order to optimize the point-source detection
efficiency.  Next, SED-matched combinations of the three bands are
created, for two SEDs: "flat" (a source with AB color zero), and
"red", a source with AB color :math:`g-r = 1`, :math:`r-z = 1`.  Sources above 6\ |sigma|
are detected in each of these two SED-matched filters, as well as in each band independently.

PSF
===

The Tractor makes use of the PSF on each individual exposure.  There is no
PSF computed for the image stacks, as that would not be used.

The PSF for the individual exposures are first computed independently for each CCD
using PSFEx, generating spatially-varying pixelized models.

Sky Level
=========

The Community Pipeline removes a sky level that includes a sky pattern, an illumination correction,
and a single scaled fringe pattern.  These steps are described here:
https://legacy.noirlab.edu/noao/staff/fvaldes/CPDocPrelim/PL201_3.html .
This makes the sky level in the processed images near zero, and removes most pattern artifacts.
A constant sky level is then added back to the image that is the mean of what was removed.

Additionally, we compute and remove a spatially varying (spline) sky
model, by detecting and masking sources, then computing medians in
sliding 512-pixel boxes.  The stacked images have this sky level
removed.

Tractor Catalogs
================

The Tractor code runs within the geometrical region
of a brick.  This fitting is performed on the individual exposures
that overlap the brick, without making use of the image stacks.
This preserves the full information content of the data set in the fits,
handles masked pixels without the need for uncertain interpolation techniques,
and fits to data points without the complication of pixel covariances.

Morphological classification
============================

The Tractor fitting can allow any of the source properties or
image calibration parameters (such as the PSF) to float.
Only the source properties were allowed to float in DR2.
These are continuous properties for the object centers, fluxes,
and the shape parameters.  There is also the discrete choice of which
model type to use.  In DR2, five morphological types are used: point sources,
"simple" galaxies (an exponential profile with a fixed 0.45\ |Prime| effective radius
and round profile),
deVaucouleurs profiles
(elliptical galaxies), exponential profiles (spiral galaxies), and composite
profiles that are deVaucouleurs + exponential (with the same source center).
The total numbers of the different morphological types in DR2 are:

================= ==================
Number of Sources Type
================= ==================
   288,347,865    All objects
   262,426,862    Objects in a Primary brick
   149,084,610    ``PSF`` objects in a Primary brick
    69,164,070    ``SIMP`` objects in a Primary brick
    31,300,725    ``EXP`` objects in a Primary brick
    11,610,513    ``DEV`` objects in a Primary brick
     1,266,944    ``COMP`` objects in a Primary brick
================= ==================


The decision to retain an object in the catalog and to re-classify it using
models more complicated than a point source is made using the penalized
changes to |chi|\ |sup2| in the image after subtracting the models for
other sources.
The "PSF" and "SIMP" models are computed for
every source and the better of these two is used when deciding whether to keep
the source.  A source is retained if its penalized |chi|\ |sup2| is improved by 25;
this corresponds to a |chi|\ |sup2| difference of 27 (because of the penalty
of 2 for the source centroid).  Sources below this threshold are removed.
The source is classified as the better of point source or simple galaxy
unless the penalized |chi|\ |sup2|
is improved by 9 (*i.e.*, approximately a 3\ |sigma| improvement) by treating
it as a deVaucouleurs or exponential profile.
The classification is a composite of deVaucouleurs + exponential if it is both a
better fit to a single profile over the point source, and the composite improves
the penalized |chi|\ |sup2| by another 9.  These choices implicitly mean
that any extended source classifications have to be at least 5.8\ |sigma| detections
and that composite profiles must be at least 6.5\ |sigma| detections.

The fluxes are not constrained to be positive-valued.  This allows
the fitting of very low signal-to-noise sources without introducing
biases at the faint end.  It also allows the stacking of fluxes
at the catalog level.


Tractor Implementation Details
==============================

Tractor fundamentally treats the fitting as a |chi|\ |sup2| minimization
problem.  The current core routine uses the sparse least squares
solver from the scipy (scientific python) package, or the open source
Ceres solver (http://ceres-solver.org), originally developed by
Google.

The galaxy profiles are approximated
with mixture-of-gaussian (MoG) models (https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.6563)
and are convolved by the pixelized PSF models using a new Fourier-space
method (Lang, in prep).
The galaxy profile approximation introduces errors in these
models typically at the level of :math:`10^{-4}` or smaller.
The PSF models are treated as pixel-convolved quantities,
and are evaluated at the integral pixel coordinates without integrating
any functions over the pixels.

The Tractor algorithm could be run with both the source parameters
and the calibration parameters allowed to float, at the cost of
more compute time and the necessity to use much larger blobs because
of the non-locality of the calibrations.  A more practical approach
would be to iterate between fitting source parameters in brick space,
and fitting calibration parameters in exposure space.  Such iterations
will be considered and tested for future data releases.
Another practical issue is that the current PSF models may allow
too much freedom.

Photometry
==========

The flux calibration for DR2 is on the AB natural system of the DECam instrument.
An AB system reports the same flux in any band for a source whose spectrum is
constant in units of erg/cm\ |sup2|/Hz. A source with a spectrum of
:math:`f = 10^{-(48.6+22.5)/2.5}` erg/cm\ |sup2|/Hz
would be reported to have an integrated flux of 1 nanomaggie in any filter.
The natural system means that we have not
applied color terms to any of the photometry, but report fluxes as observed in the DECam filters.

Zero point magnitudes for the CP version 2 reductions of the DECam images
were computed by comparing 7\ |Prime| diameter aperture photometry to
PS1 photometry, where the latter was modified with color terms
to place the PS1 photometry on the DECam system.  The same color terms
are applied to all CCDs.
Zero points are computed separately for each CCD, but not for each amplifier.
The color terms to convert from PS1 to DECam were computed for stars
in the color range :math:`0.4 < (g-i) < 2.7` as follows:

.. math::
                (g-i) & = & g_{\mathrm{PS}} - i_{\mathrm{PS}} \\
   g_{\mathrm{DECam}} & = & g_{\mathrm{PS}} + 0.04709 (g-i) + 0.00084 (g-i)^2 - 0.00340 (g-i)^3 \\
   r_{\mathrm{DECam}} & = & r_{\mathrm{PS}} - 0.09939 (g-i) + 0.04509 (g-i)^2 - 0.01488 (g-i)^3 \\
   z_{\mathrm{DECam}} & = & z_{\mathrm{PS}} - 0.13404 (g-i) + 0.06591 (g-i)^2 - 0.01695 (g-i)^3 \\

The brightnesses of objects are all stored as linear fluxes in units of nanomaggies.  The conversion
from linear fluxes to magnitudes is :math:`m = 22.5 - 2.5 \log_{10}(\mathrm{flux})`. These linear fluxes are well-defined even at the faint end, and the errors on the linear fluxes should
be very close to a normal distribution.  The fluxes can be negative for faint objects, and indeed we
expect many such cases for the faintest objects.

The DECam and WISE fluxes are all within a few percent of being on an AB system.
The WISE Level 1 images and the unWISE image stacks are on a Vega system.
We have converted these to an AB system using the recommended conversions by
the WISE team documented here
http://wise2.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/release/allsky/expsup/sec4_4h.html#conv2ab. Namely,
:math:`\mathrm{Flux}_{\mathrm{AB}} = \mathrm{Flux}_{\mathrm{Vega}} * 10^{-(\Delta m/2.5)}`
where :math:`\Delta m` = 2.699, 3.339, 5.174, and 6.620 mag in the W1, W2, W3 and W4 bands.
For example, a WISE W1 image should be multiplied by :math:`10^{-2.699/2.5} = 0.083253` to
give units consistent with the Tractor catalogs.  These conversion factors are recorded in the
Tractor catalog headers ("WISEAB1", etc).

.. _`DR8 catalogs`: ../../dr8/catalogs/#galactic-extinction-coefficients

Galactic Extinction
===================

The most recent values of the Galactic extinction coefficients are available on the `DR8 catalogs`_ page.


Astrometry
==========

The astrometry is currently tied to star positions in Pan-STARRS-1,
so the epoch is implicitly at the time of observation for Pan-STARRS-1.
We keep the polynomial distortion model provided by the Community Pipeline,
computing a simple RA,Dec offset for each CCD to align it with Pan-STARRS-1.
The residuals are typically smaller than |plusmn|\ 0.03\ |Prime|.

In the future, the plan is to tie the astrometry to the GAIA astrometry,
at which point we will use the predicted stellar positions at the
DECam epoch of observation.

Image Stacks
============

The image stacks are provided for convenience, but were not used in the Tractor fits.
These images are oversized by approximately 260 pixels in each dimension.
These are tangent projections centered at each brick center, North up, with dimensions of 3600 |times| 3600
and a scale of 0.262\ |Prime|/pix.  Note that the image stacks are computed using nearest-neighbor
interpolation, so should not be used for precision work.


Depths
======

The median 5\ |sigma| point source depths for areas in DR2 with 3 observations is g=24.65, r=23.61, z=22.84.
This is based upon the formal errors in the Tractor catalogs for point sources; those errors need further confirmation.
This can be compared to the predicted proposed depths for 2 observations at 1.5\ |Prime| seeing of g=24.7, r=23.9, z=23.0.


Code Versions
=============

* `LegacyPipe <https://github.com/legacysurvey/legacypipe>`_: mixture of versions starting with "dr2p" tag; documented in all file headers.
* NOAO Community Pipeline: mixture of versions; recorded as PLVER.
* SourceExtractor 2.19.5, PSFEx 3.17.1
* `Astrometry.net <https://github.com/dstndstn/astrometry.net>`_: 0.64
* `Tractor <https://github.com/dstndstn/tractor>`_: dr2.2

Glossary
========

Blob
    Continguous region of pixels above a detection threshold and neighboring
    pixels; Tractor is optimized within blobs.

Brick
    A region bounded by lines of constant RA and DEC; the DR2 reductions
    are performed within bricks of size approximately 0.25\ |deg| |times| 0.25\ |deg|.

CP
    Community Pipeline (DECam reduction pipeline operated by NOAO;
    https://legacy.noirlab.edu/noao/staff/fvaldes/CPDocPrelim/PL201_3.html).

DECaLS
    `Dark Energy Camera Legacy Survey <https://www.legacysurvey.org>`_.

DR2
    DECam Legacy Survey Data Release 2, January 2016.

DECam
    Dark Energy Camera on the NOAO Blanco 4-meter telescope.

maggie
    Linear flux units, where an object with an AB magnitude of 0 has a
    flux of 1.0 maggie.  A convenient unit is the nanomaggie: a flux of 1 nanomaggie
    corresponds to an AB magnitude of 22.5.

MoG
    Mixture-of-gaussian model to approximate the galaxy models (https://arxiv.org/abs/1210.6563).

NOAO
    `National Optical Astronomy Observatory <https://legacy.noirlab.edu>`_.

nanomaggie
    Linear flux units, where an object with an AB magnitude of 22.5 has a flux
    of :math:`1 \times 10^{-9}` maggie or 1.0 nanomaggie.

PSF
    Point spread function.

PSFEx
    `Emmanuel Bertin's PSF fitting code <http://www.astromatic.net/software/psfex>`_.

SDSS
    `Sloan Digital Sky Survey <https://www.sdss.org>`_.

SDSS DR12
    `Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data Release 12 <https://www.sdss.org/dr12/>`_.

SED
    Spectral energy distribution.

SourceExtractor
    `Source Extractor reduction code <http://www.astromatic.net/software/sextractor>`_.

SFD98
    Schlegel, Finkbeiner & Davis 1998 extinction maps (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998ApJ...500..525S/abstract).

Tractor
    `Dustin Lang's inference code <https://github.com/dstndstn/tractor>`_.

unWISE
    New coadds of the WISE imaging, at original full resolution
    (http://unwise.me, https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0308).

WISE
    `Wide Infrared Survey Explorer <http://wise.ssl.berkeley.edu>`_.
